<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<li id="note-1" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span epub:type="se:name.person.full-name">John Stuart Mill</span> was then in his thirty-fourth year and <span epub:type="se:name.person.full-name">Adam Smith</span> had been forty-nine years dead. <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span epub:type="se:name.person.full-name">Jean Victor Moreau</span>, the Republican French general, made famous by the extraordinary retreat through the <span epub:type="z3998:place">Black Forest</span> and the brilliant <span epub:type="z3998:event">Battle of Hohenlinden</span>, and afterwards exiled by <span epub:type="z3998:personal-name">Napoleon</span>’s jealousy. <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-3" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>There was also an adopted child, <span epub:type="z3998:personal-name">Harriet</span>, who, growing up, married <abbr class="name">J. H.</abbr> Evans. <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-4" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This circumstance had nothing to do with their decision to publish the book, as its author was unknown to them. <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-5" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Letter to <i>National Single Taxer</i>, <time datetime="1898-08-31"><abbr>Aug.</abbr> 31, 1898</time>. <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-6" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Speech, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Crime of Poverty</i>, <time>1885</time>. After uttering the foregoing passage, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> George asked: “Who would dare in New York or in any of our great cities, to say that to a young clerk now?” <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-6" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>At fourteen <span epub:type="se:name.person.full-name">Adam Smith</span> was attending the <span epub:type="z3998:organization">University of Glasgow</span>; while <span epub:type="se:name.person.full-name">John Stuart Mill</span> was learning Greek at three, Latin at eight, logic at twelve and political economy at thirteen. <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-7" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-8" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In a speech in <span epub:type="z3998:place">Liverpool</span> many years later (<time datetime="1888-11-30"><abbr>Nov.</abbr> 30, 1888</time>) <span epub:type="se:name.person.full-name">Henry George</span> said:</p>
					<blockquote>
						<p>“I was educated in a very strict faith. My people and the people whom I knew in my childhood, the people who went to our church and other churches of the same kind, had a notion that the theatre was a very bad place, and they would not go to one on any account. There was a celebrated fellow-citizen of mine of the name of <span epub:type="z3998:personal-name">Barnun</span>. <span epub:type="z3998:personal-name">Barnum</span> went to <span epub:type="z3998:place">Philadelphia</span>, and he recognised that prejudice, and he saw that, although there were a number of theatres running for the ungodly, a theatre he could get the godly to go to would pay extremely well. But he did not start a theatre. Oh, no! He started a lecture room, and we had in that lecture room theatrical representations, and it was crowded every night in the week and there were two matinées.”</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-8" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-9" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“When I was a boy I went down to the wharf with another boy to see the first iron steamship which had ever crossed the ocean to our port. Now, hearing of an iron steamship seemed to us then a good deal like hearing of a leaden kite or a wooden cooking stove. But, we had not been long aboard of her, before my companion said in a tone of contemptuous disgust: ‘Pooh! I see how it is. She’s all lined with wood; that’s the reason she floats.’ I could not controvert him for the moment, but I was not satisfied, and sitting down on the wharf when he left me, I set to work trying mental experiments. If it was the wood in side of her that made her float, then the more wood the higher she would float; and mentally I loaded her up with wood. But, as I was familiar with the process of making boats out of blocks of wood, I at once saw that, instead of floating higher, she would sink deeper. Then I mentally took all the wood out of her, as we dug out our wooden boats, and saw that thus lightened she would float higher still. Then, in imagination, I jammed a hole in her, and saw that the water would run in and she would sink, as did our wooded boats when ballasted with leaden keels. And thus I saw, as clearly as though I could have actually made these experiments with the steamer, that it was not the wooden lining that made her float, but her hollowness, or as I would now phrase it, her displacement of water.”</p>
						<cite epub:type="z3998:citation">Lecture on <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Study of Political Economy</i> at <span epub:type="z3998:organization">University of California</span>, <time datetime="1877-03-09">March 9, 1877</time>.</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-9" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-10" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>When a boy, his mother would frequently buy a piece of sweet suet and melting it down, would mix with its oil or fat a little bergamot, thereby making a pomade for the hair. <span epub:type="se:name.person.full-name">Henry George</span> never during his life liked fats with his meat at the table, and at times would say in the family that it was because when a boy he had to put it on his head. Not withstanding the use of the hair preparation, he and all his brothers followed their father and grew bald early. <a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-10" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-11" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“In the last generation a full-rigged Indiaman would be considered a very large vessel if she registered 500 tons. Now we are building coasting schooners of 1000 tons”</p>
						<cite epub:type="z3998:citation"><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Social Problems</i>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V.</span> (Memorial edition, <abbr>p.</abbr> 46.).</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-11" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-12" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the back pages of this little journal are some historical, scientific and other notes probably made while reading. These bear date as late as <time>April, 1859</time>, at which time its owner was in California. <a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-12" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-13" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“In later years I have sometimes ‘supped with Lucullus,’ without recalling what he gave me to eat, whereas I remember to this day ham and eggs of my first breakfast on a canal-packet drawn by horses that actually trotted; how sweet hard-tack, munched in the middle watch while the sails slept in the trade-wind, has tasted; what a dish for a prince was sea-pie on the rare occasions when a pig had been killed or a porpoise harpooned; and how good was the plum-duff that came to the forecastle only on Sundays and great holidays. I remember as though it were an hour ago, that, talking to myself rather than to him, I said to a Yorkshire sailor on my first voyage: ‘I wish I were home, to get a piece of pie.’ I recall his expression and tone, for they shamed me, as he quietly said: ‘Are you sure you would find a piece of pie there?’ Thoughtless as the French princess who asked why the people who were crying for bread did not try cake, ‘Home’ was associated in my mind with pie of some sort⁠—apple or peach or sweet-potato or cranberry or mince⁠—to be had for the taking, and I did not for the moment realise that in many homes pie was as rare a luxury as plums in our sea-duff.”</p>
						<cite epub:type="z3998:citation"><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Science of Political Economy</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 352.</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-13" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-14" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“Thirty years ago ship-building had reached such a pitch of excellence in this country that we built not only for ourselves, but for other nations. American ships were the fastest sailers, the largest carriers and everywhere got the quickest dispatch and the highest freights. The registered tonnage of the United States almost equalled that of Great Britain, and a few years promised to give us the unquestionable supremacy of the ocean.”</p>
						<cite epub:type="z3998:citation"><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Protection or Free Trade</i>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVIII.</span> (Memorial Edition, <abbr>p.</abbr> 186).</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p><span epub:type="z3998:name-title">Captain</span> Marryat, a by no means flattering critic of Americans, in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diary in America (First Series)</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:place">Philadelphia</span>, <time>1839</time>, says, <abbr>p.</abbr> 186: “It appears, then, that from various causes, our merchant vessels have lost their sailing properties, whilst the Americans have the fastest sailers in the world; and it is for that reason, and no other, that, although sailing at a much greater expense, the Americans can afford to outbid us, and take all our best seamen.” <a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-14" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-15" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sunrise Case in <span epub:type="z3998:place">San Francisco</span>. <a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-15" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-16" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Science of Political Economy</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 30</cite>. <a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-16" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-17" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This was probably the last letter he received from Captain Miller, and before the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Hindoo</i> had returned from her voyage and the captain had run on to <span epub:type="z3998:place">Philadelphia</span>, <span epub:type="se:name.person.full-name">Henry George</span> had sailed for <span epub:type="z3998:place">California</span>, so that they never again met. The captain died in <span epub:type="z3998:place">Brooklyn</span>, in <time>May, 1877</time>, in his forty-eighth year, and his friend, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Rev.</abbr> <span epub:type="se:name.person.full-name">George A. Latimer</span>, <span epub:type="se:name.person.full-name">Henry George</span>‘s cousin, officiating, was buried in <span epub:type="z3998:place">Greenwood Cemetery</span>, where <span epub:type="se:name.person.full-name">Henry George</span> himself, twenty years later, was to rest. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-17" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-18" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“I was born in a Northern State, I have never lived in the South, I am not yet gray; but I well remember, as every American of middle age must remember, how over and over again I have heard all questionings of slavery silenced by the declaration that the negroes were the <em>property</em> of their masters, and that to take away a man’s slave without payment was as much a crime as to take away his horse without payment.”</p>
						<cite epub:type="z3998:citation"><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Land Question</i>, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII.</span> (Memorial Edition, <abbr>p.</abbr> 49). <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-18" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></cite>
					</blockquote>
				</li>
				<li id="note-19" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This essay covers four pages of paper, the first page evidently written with great care, and the last with great carelessness, the whole terminating with the ejaculation, “Thank God, I’m done!” <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-19" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-20" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Thirty years later, when his son, Richard, manifested interest in phrenology, Henry George discouraged him, saying that though indirectly or collaterally there probably was truth in it, the subject was one that, in his opinion, Nature did not intend to have man know much about, since the discovery of constitutional characteristics would with most men seem to indicate foreordination, and checking free and independent action, would tend to produce fatalism. Moreover, he said, phrenology was not needed for man’s progress, for <em>that</em> did not depend upon a knowledge of the relative development of the faculties, but rather upon the <em>use</em> of the faculties, whatever they might be. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-20" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-21" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Notes from record of <i epub:type="name.vessel.ship">Shubrick</i>, by courtesy of the <span epub:type="z3998:organization"><abbr>U.S.</abbr> Light-House Board</span> at <span epub:type="z3998:place">Washington, DC</span>, and of<span epub:type="se:name.person.full-name"> Captain <abbr class="name">Geo.</abbr> <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Coffin</span>, <abbr epub:type="z398:organization">U.S.N.</abbr>, <span epub:type="z3998:name-title">Inspector 12th</span> <span epub:type="z3998:organization">Light-House District</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:place">San Francisco, <abbr>Cal.</abbr></span> <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-21" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-22" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>From shorthand notes by <span epub:type="se:name.person.full-name">Ralph Meeker</span> of a conversation, <span epub:type="z3998:place">New York</span>, <time>October, 1897</time>. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-22" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-23" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Jim” <span epub:type="z3998:family-name">McMullen</span>, as he was commonly called, was regarded by his boy friends as slow of comprehension. One day wishing to go swimming without McMullen, they tried the expedient of telling him one after another that his head was swollen and that he must be sick. This succeeded so well that the boy went home and to bed in a fever of excitement, and they had great difficulty in convincing him that they had been deluding him. The experience so frightened <span epub:type="se:name.person.full-name">Henry George</span> that he never again indulged in that kind of a practical joke. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-23" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-24" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Probably a reference to <span epub:type="se:name.person.full-name">William Walker</span> of <span epub:type="z3998:place">Tennessee</span>, who led a filibustering expedition into <span epub:type="z3998:place">Lower California</span> and was driven out. Then he went to <span epub:type="z3998:place">Nicaragua, C.A.</span>, assumed the title of <span epub:type="z3998:name-title">President</span> of that State, and re-established chattel slavery, which had been abolished. He was driven from power in <time>May, 1857</time>, but escaped to <span epub:type="z3998:place">New Orleans</span>. In 1860 he led a filibustering expedition against <span epub:type="z3998:place">Honduras</span>, but within four months was captured and shot at <span epub:type="z3998:place">Truxillo</span>. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-24" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-25" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This sketch on the following month, <time datetime="1866-">July 14, 1866</time>, was republished in the <span epub:type="z3998:place">San Francisco</span> <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Californian</i>, conducted by some printer friends of <span epub:type="se:name.person.full-name">Henry George</span>. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-25" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-26" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>If <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:family-name">George</span> had any superstitious feeling at the time regarding the matter⁠—and there is nothing to indicate that he had⁠—he certainly did not continue to entertain it in after years, but believed the movements ot the coffin due to the accidental loosening of weights, peculiarities of currents and other natural causes. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-26" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-27" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="name.vessel.ship">Shubrick’s</i> log. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-27" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-28" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Though the <i epub:type="name.vessel.ship">Shubrick’s</i> record shows that later on there were a number of desertions among the officers and crew of the vessel, there is no indication whatever as to <span epub:type="se:name.person.full-name">when Henry George</span> left, or that he did not remain until the expiration of his term of service⁠—<time datetime="1858-11-11"><abbr>Nov.</abbr> 11, 1858</time>. <a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-28" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-29" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“There is no mystery as to the cause which so suddenly and so largely raised wages in <span epub:type="z3998:place">California</span> in 1849, and in <span epub:type="z3998:place">Australia</span> in 1852. It was the discovery of placer mines in unappropriated land to which labour was free that raised the wages of cooks in <span epub:type="z3998:place">San Francisco</span> restaurants to $500 a mouth, and left ships to rot in the harbour without officers or crew until their owners would consent to pay rates that in any other part of the globe seemed fabulous. Had these mines been on appropriated land, or had they been immediately monopolised so that rent could have arisen, it would have been land values that would have leaped upward, not wages.”</p>
						<cite epub:type="z3998:citation"><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Progress and Poverty</i>, Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V.</span> chap, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> (Memorial Edition, <abbr>p.</abbr> 290).</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-29" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-30" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span epub:type="z3998:place">Metropolitan Hall</span>, <time datetime="1890-02-04"><abbr>Feb.</abbr> 4, 1890</time>. <a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-30" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-31" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>
						<cite><span epub:type="z3998:family-name">Hittell</span>’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of California</i>, <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III.</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 160.</cite>
						<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-31" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-32" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Meeker notes, October, 1897. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-32" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-33" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Broderick and Gwin</i>, by <span epub:type="se:name.person.full-name">James O’Meara</span>, pp. 225⁠–⁠254. <span epub:type="z3998:given-name">Terry</span> was shot and killed by a Deputy <abbr>U.S.</abbr> Marshal in <time>1889</time>, when committing an assault upon <span epub:type="z3998:name-title">U.S. Supreme Court Justice</span> <span epub:type="z3998:family-name">Field</span>, growing out of a case in which <span epub:type="z3998:given-name">Terry</span> had been committed to jail by <span epub:type="z3998:name-title">Judge</span> <span epub:type="z3998:family-name">Field</span> for contempt of court. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-33" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
